Compute and Transfer Example Flows (#1)
globus/globus-flows-examples: compute_transfer_examples/README.md

# Globus Compute and Transfer Flow Examples

This guide demonstrates how to build flows that combine Globus Compute and Globus Transfer to process and move data. You'll learn how to create two different flows that archive (tar) files and transfer them from a source collection to a destination collection.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have a shared GCS collection and Globus Compute endpoint.

> If you haven't set these up, follow [this guide](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5.4/) for setting up the GCS collection, and [this guide](https://globus-compute.readthedocs.io/en/latest/endpoints/installation.html) for setting up the Globus Compute endpoint. **Note**: The GCS collection and Globus Compute endpoint must have access to the same filesystem at the same path.

Reviewer: > **Note**: The GCS collection and Globus Compute endpoint must have access to the same filesystem at the same path.

I'm wondering if the meaning I am taking is precisely what is meant, as this seems to contradict the transformations described below. Do we mean something more like "must both allow access to the same location in the filesystem where operations will be performed"? Even that doesn't sound quite right, but trying to make sure I'm understanding the intended meaning.

Author: Yeah that wording isn't great... How about something like: "The GCS collection and Globus Compute endpoint must **both** have read/write permissions to the same filesystem location where operations will be performed."

Reviewer: I like that! Works for me :)

## Register the Globus Compute Function

First, register the `do_tar` Compute function that your flows will invoke to create the output tarfiles. Run the provided python script:

```bash
./transfer_compute_example/register_compute_func.py
```

and copy down the Compute function's UUID.

**Important**: Use the same Python version for registration as the one running on your Globus Compute Endpoint.

### The `do_tar` Compute function

`do_tar` takes four parameters that the flow will need to provide:

| Parameter | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `src_paths` | String or list of path(s) to files/directories to archive |
| `dest_path` | Where to write the tar.gz archive (directory or file path) |
| `transform_from` | The path prefix to replace (default: "/") |

> | `transform_to` | The prefix to use for absolute paths (default: "/") |

Reviewer 2: These names are not communicating their purpose (to me, at least). After reading the example scenario below, it seems like it might be worthwhile to rename these.

If I'm understanding the example, the GCS collection maps its root to `/path/to/root/` on the filesystem. Would `gcs_base_path` (which uses the naming from [the GCS `globus-connect-server collection create` command](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5/reference/collection/create/)) be equivalent to `transform_to` here?

For `transform_from`, I'm not yet clear what its purpose is. I will likely understand after reading more, but since I'm not clear after reading the text here, I think this needs to be clarified but I don't yet have suggestions.

Author: To be honest, I'm not entirely sure. The `transform_from` `transform_to` parameters were something I had initially lifted from a comment made by Lei on how he setup a `do_tar` function that could handle the path mappings. I was assuming in my head there was a potential collection config that could require the GCS collection's base path mapping to something other than '/',  but re-looking at the GCS docs, I'm not seeing one. @LeiGlobus unless there is something I'm missing here, I'm inclined to go with your suggestion of `gcs_base_path` and remove `transform_from` as a parameter.

Reviewer 3: The context:  when I first wrote that function 2 weeks ago (the tar one), I tried to make it generic but also wasn't clear on what the terminology in GCS was regarding the "prefix" paths.   So thought that a 'from' and 'to' prefix mapping name in the function was fine. 

Now that I think about it, as this is an example for people to use to interface with GCS, a name more in line with GCS is more clear in terms of its usage.  (what Kurt suggested below base_path makes sense).

So it's something like gcs_base_path_from and gcs_base_path_to?  For mapping to a path without any base paths, then only one side is necessary to be specified.

### Path Transformation Explained

> The path transformation parameters `transform_from` and `transform_to` handle differences between how paths appear in the Globus ecosystem versus how they exist on the actual GCS collection's filesystem.

Reviewer: I'm not quite sure I follow this as intended, so I'm not quite sure if this revision is correct, but my guess is that we mean to say:

```suggestion
The parameters `transform_from` and `transform_to` handle differences between paths as exposed by the GCS collection and paths on the underlying filesystem.
```

**Example scenario:**
- Your GCS collection maps its root to the absolute path `/path/to/root/`.
- A user wants to tar the files at the absolute path `/path/to/root/input_files/`.
- To both the user and Flows service, this path appears as `/input_files/` on the GCS collection.
- However, the Compute function running on the GCS collection **does not know** about the mapping and can only find the files with the absolute paths.

Thus, the Compute function must be provided with the GCS root mapping to do any needed transformations. In this example:

> - Set `transform_to` to the mapped root path (`/path/to/root/`) to transform the input src_paths to absolute paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set `transform_to` to the mapped root path (`/path/to/root/`) to transform the input `src_paths` to absolute paths.
```

> - Set `transform_from` to the root directory (`/`) to transform the absolute paths to Globus paths.

Reviewer: I'd avoid saying "Globus paths"—I think the potential for confusion is too high, as there isn't a uniform concept of what a Globus path is. I think precisely what is meant is "path in the GCS collection" or something to that effect?

These transformations ensure the Compute function can correctly locate and access files regardless of how collection paths are mapped.

## Compute and Transfer Flow: Example 1

> In the first example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user provided single source file that exists on your GCS collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes a user-provided source file that already exists in the co-located GCS collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:
```

1. Set constants for the run
2. Create an output directory named after the flow's run ID on your GCS collection

> 3. Invoke the Compute function `do_tar` on the source file and create a tarfile in the output directory

Reviewer 2: `file`, singular, seems like it might be incorrect. Maybe this?

```suggestion
3. Invoke the Compute function `do_tar` on the source endpoint and create a tarfile in the output directory
```

4. Transfer the resulting tarfile to the destination collection provided in the flow input
5. Delete the output directory

### Registering the Flow

1. Edit `compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_definition.json` and replace the placeholder values:
   - `gcs_endpoint_id`: Your GCS Collection ID
   - `compute_endpoint_id`: Your Compute Endpoint ID

>    - `compute_func_id`: The UUID of the registered `do_tar` function

Reviewer 2: I would prefer that this not be abbreviated; `function_id` matches the terminology presented in other programmatic contexts and documentation, so I think it's nice to use the full name here.

```suggestion
   - `compute_function_id`: The UUID of the registered `do_tar` function
```

>    - `compute_transform_from` and `compute_transform_to`: If your GCS collection uses path mapping

Reviewer 2: I did quick search on Google for "globus gcs path mapping" but didn't see results. Is there a similar (but documented/searchable) term for "path mapping"?

Reviewer 3: Both the storage gateway and mapped collection have path restrictions, the base path for the collection is documented here: https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5/data-access-guide/#configure_collection_base_path

Author: I went and added that doc as a hyperlink in that section since I think its good information to provide there.

Reviewer 2: If "path mapping" means "base path" then I recommend strictly using the terminology "base path".

2. Register the flow:
   ```bash
   globus flows create "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 1" \
     ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_definition.json \
     --input-schema ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_schema.json
   ```

> 3. Save the Flow ID returned by this command

Reviewer 2: Above, the term "copy down" is used. I think that it will be kind to use the same terminology throughout ("copy" or "save" both seem good to me, but I recommend choosing one).

### Running the Flow

1. Create the flow input json file like so:
   ```json
   {

>        "source_path": "/path/to/your/source/file",

Reviewer 2: Above, the Compute function takes `src_paths` as its input. Why is `source_path` singular here?

Author: I set up both examples so that the same compute function can be used for each. The compute function is expecting in the param `src_paths: Union[List[str], str]` which can be either a single path (used by the first example) or a list of paths (used by the second example). I could perhaps rewrite that function to break it out into two params `src_path: str` and `src_paths: List[str]` to make it less confusing?

Reviewer 2: Oh man, I don't know. It might be worthwhile to skip the singular case entirely, rather than accommodating both possibilities.

Author: I think your right, I re-wrote it to skip the singular case.

Reviewer 3: Probably part of the reason Kurt suggested the above, but singular vs. plural (overloading) is frequently the cause of syntax errors while trying to figure out how to use something.  Accommodating both adds more flexibility but keeping track of singular vs. plural is more work (and more confusing).

I see that your sample function docstr example is singular, but the flows have to account for single and plural.  Plural adds a lot of complexity to the flow syntax as well in constructing the payload.

A few lines in default values and type defs in python isn't much but the Flows side is much more complex because of it (the side that is much less familiar in syntax to most users).  I'd be even tempted to suggest a single source path everywhere, but I don't know the base requirements of this demo, so will leave it to you guys.

       "destination_path": "/path/to/your/destination/file.tar.gz",
       "destination_endpoint_id": "your-destination-endpoint-uuid"
   }
   ```

2. Start the flow:
   ```bash

>    globus flows start <FLOW_ID> \

Reviewer 2: As bash syntax highlighting is used throughout, could I recommend using `$FLOW_ID` as the stand-in, rather than `<FLOW_ID>`?

Alternatively, it may be that bash syntax highlight is buying us much, so it may also work to just allow this to be a code block without syntax highlighting at all. Thoughts?

Author: I'm not a huge fan `$FLOW_ID` since that could imply that it should be in an environment variable that was somehow set in a not shown step. I'm also not sure what we would gain by removing the bash syntax highlighting. I have traditionally interpreted <> as implying fill this value in. Not entirely sure what is best here...

Reviewer 2: `bash` syntax highlighting can help with keywords like `if`, `for`, and variables like `$GLOBUS_SDK_ENVIRONMENT`. The code above isn't really using bash constructs beyond perhaps `\` line continuations, so there's not a strong reason to choose bash over Powershell over text.

However, the `<FLOW_ID>` has the angle brackets highlighted because they're I/O redirections, and I wish we could highlight that as a CLI documentation construct. I looked for a CLI documentation markup highlighting, which is actually what's desirable here, but couldn't find one.

Anyway, I'm going to mark this as resolved but `bash` isn't buying us much for syntax highlighting because it isn't correct for this use case.

     --input <YOUR FLOW INPUT FILE> \
     --label "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 1 Run"
   ```

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps:

```suggestion

   Save/copy/copy down the run ID for use in the next command.
```

3. Monitor the run progress:
   ```bash
   globus flows run show <RUN_ID>
   ```

## Compute and Transfer Flow: Example 2

> In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user provided list source files that exists on a user provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user-provided list source files that exists on a user provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:
```

# Globus Compute and Transfer Flow Examples

This guide demonstrates how to build flows that combine Globus Compute and Globus Transfer to process and move data. You'll learn how to create two different flows that archive (tar) files and transfer them from a source collection to a destination collection.

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have a shared GCS collection and Globus Compute endpoint.
If you haven't set these up, follow [this guide](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5.4/) for setting up the GCS collection, and [this guide](https://globus-compute.readthedocs.io/en/latest/endpoints/installation.html) for setting up the Globus Compute endpoint. **Note**: The GCS collection and Globus Compute endpoint must both have read/write permissions to the same filesystem location where operations will be performed.

## Register the Globus Compute Function

> First, register the `do_tar` Compute function that your flows will invoke to create the output tarfiles. Run the provided python script:

Reviewer: They'll need to install the requirements (presumably into a virtual env). Looks like this imports `globus_compute_sdk`.

Author: I added a section in 'Prerequisites' for installing both the globus-cli and globus_compute_sdk.

```bash

> ./transfer_compute_example/register_compute_func.py

Reviewer: This doesn't appear to be a valid path in this repo.

```

and save the Compute function's UUID.

> **Important**: Use the same Python version for registration as the one running on your Globus Compute Endpoint.

Reviewer: Is there an easy way to verify the remote python version via the CLI? If so, might be helpful to show a CLI snippet here as an example?

Author: After thinking about it for a bit, adding this would mean diving into the `globus-compute-endpoint` CLI which is then encroaching on the territory of the linked tutorial for endpoint setup in 'Prerequisites'. Unless you have strong feelings about this, I'm inclined to leave it as is.

### The `do_tar` Compute function

`do_tar` takes three parameters that the flow will need to provide:

| Parameter | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `src_paths` | List of paths to the files/directories to be archived |
| `dest_path` | Where to write the tar archive (directory or file path) |
| `gcs_base_path` | The shared GCS collection's configured base path. (default: "/") |

### GCS Collection Base Paths

> The parameter `gcs_base_path` is provided to the compute function to allow it to transform the user input paths to absolute paths. This is needed when the shared GCS instance has [configured the collection's base path](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5/data-access-guide/#configure_collection_base_path).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter `gcs_base_path` is provided to the Compute function to allow it to transform the user input paths to absolute paths. This is needed when the shared GCS instance has [configured the collection's base path](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5/data-access-guide/#configure_collection_base_path).
```

**Example scenario:**
- Your GCS collection has configured its base path to `/path/to/root/`.
- A user wants to tar the files at the absolute path `/path/to/root/input_files/`.
- To both the user and Flows service, this path appears as `/input_files/` on the GCS collection.
- However, the Compute function running on the shared GCS instance **does not know** about the collection's configured base path and can only find the files using absolute paths.

> Thus, the Compute function must be provided with the GCS collection's configured base path to do the necessary transformations. In this example, `gcs_base_path` would need to be set to `/path/to/root/`.

Reviewer: This is great 👍

## Compute and Transfer Flow: Example 1
In the first example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes a user-provided list of source files that **already** exists in the co-located GCS collection, creates a tarfile from them, and transfers the tarfile to a user-provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:
1. Set constants for the run
2. Create an output directory named after the flow's run ID on your GCS collection
3. Invoke the Compute function `do_tar` on the source endpoint to create a tar archive from the input source files and save it in the output directory
4. Transfer the resulting tarfile to the destination collection provided in the flow input
5. Delete the output directory

### Registering the Flow

1. Edit `compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_definition.json` and replace the placeholder values:
   - `gcs_endpoint_id`: Your GCS Collection ID
   - `compute_endpoint_id`: Your Compute Endpoint ID
   - `compute_function_id`: The UUID of the registered `do_tar` function

If your GCS collection has a configured base path, also edit `gcs_base_path`.

2. Register the flow:
   ```bash
   globus flows create "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 1" \

>      ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_definition.json \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ./compute_transfer_example_1_definition.json \
```

Does it make sense to prefix with the relative path to this folder everywhere if the README is in the same folder? I think I would presume that any path is relative to the current document. If you agree, we should probably make this change across all of the references.

Author: I agree, I went and made all the paths relative to that folder.

     --input-schema ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_schema.json
   ```

3. Save the Flow ID returned by this command

### Running the Flow

1. Create the flow input json file like so:
   ```json
   {
       "source_paths": ["/path/to/file1", "/path/to/file2"],
       "destination_path": "/path/to/your/destination/file.tar.gz",
       "destination_endpoint_id": "your-destination-endpoint-uuid"
   }
   ```

2. Start the flow:
   ```bash
   globus flows start <YOUR FLOW ID> \
     --input <YOUR FLOW INPUT FILE> \
     --label "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 1 Run"
   ```
   And save the run ID for use in the next command.

3. Monitor the run progress:
   ```bash
   globus flows run show <RUN_ID>
   ```

>    At this point, you might see that your flow has gone INACTIVE. This is because you need to give data access consents for any GCS collection that your flow is interacting with. Run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   At this point, you might see that your flow has become INACTIVE. This is because you need to give data access consents for any GCS collection that your flow is interacting with. Run the command:
```

   ```bash
   globus flows run resume <RUN_ID>
   ```

>    And you will be prompted to run a `globus session consent`. After granting the requested consent, try resuming the run once again and your flow should be able to proceed. As your flow encounters more required data access consents, you might need to repeat this step multiple times, however once you have granted a consent, it will remain for all future runs of that flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   And you will be prompted to run a `globus session consent`. After granting the requested consent, try resuming the run once again and your flow should be able to proceed. As your flow interacts with other collections, it may encounter additional `data_access` consents. If so, you might need to repeat this step. Once you have granted consents to a flow, it will remain (until revoked) for future runs of that flow with the same client that was used to grant the consent.
```

## Compute and Transfer Flow: Example 2

> In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user-provided list of source files that exist on a user-provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user-provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes a user-provided list of source files that exist on a user-provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user-provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:
```

> In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user-provided list of source files that exist on a user-provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user-provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:

Reviewer: Might want to clarify that there's an intermediate collection involved?

1. Set constants for the run

> 2. Create an output directory named after the flow's run ID on your GCS collection

Reviewer: "on your intermediate GCS collection"?

### Registering the Flow

1. Edit `compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_2_definition.json` and replace the placeholder values (same as in the first example).

2. Register as a new flow:
   ```bash
   globus flows create "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 2" \
     ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_2_definition.json \
     --input-schema ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_2_schema.json
   ```

   Or update the existing flow from example 1:
   ```bash
   globus flows update <FLOW_ID> \
     --title "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 2" \
     --definition ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_2_definition.json \
     --input-schema ./compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_2_schema.json
   ```

> 3. Save the Flow ID returned by this command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Save the flow ID returned by this command
```

| `gcs_base_path` | The shared GCS collection's configured base path. (default: "/") |

### GCS Collection Base Paths

The parameter `gcs_base_path` is provided to the compute function to allow it to transform the user input paths to absolute paths. This is needed when the shared GCS instance has [configured the collection's base path](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5/data-access-guide/#configure_collection_base_path).

**Example scenario:**
- Your GCS collection has configured its base path to `/path/to/root/`.
- A user wants to tar the files at the absolute path `/path/to/root/input_files/`.
- To both the user and Flows service, this path appears as `/input_files/` on the GCS collection.
- However, the Compute function running on the shared GCS instance **does not know** about the collection's configured base path and can only find the files using absolute paths.

Thus, the Compute function must be provided with the GCS collection's configured base path to do the necessary transformations. In this example, `gcs_base_path` would need to be set to `/path/to/root/`.

## Compute and Transfer Flow: Example 1

> In the first example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes a user-provided list of source files that **already** exists in the co-located GCS collection, creates a tarfile from them, and transfers the tarfile to a user-provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the first example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes a user-provided list of source files that **already** exist in the co-located GCS collection, creates a tarfile from them, and transfers the tarfile to a user-provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:
```

1. Edit `compute_transfer_examples/compute_transfer_example_1_definition.json` and replace the placeholder values:
   - `gcs_endpoint_id`: Your GCS Collection ID
   - `compute_endpoint_id`: Your Compute Endpoint ID
   - `compute_function_id`: The UUID of the registered `do_tar` function

>    - `compute_transform_from` and `compute_transform_to`: If your GCS collection uses [base path mapping](https://docs.globus.org/globus-connect-server/v5/data-access-guide/#configure_collection_base_path)

Reviewer 2: The term "mapping" here collides with "mapped collections". I think the linked documentation simply refers to "base path", and I recommend using only that term here and dropping "mapping".

2. Start the flow:
   ```bash
   globus flows start <YOUR FLOW ID> \
     --input <YOUR FLOW INPUT FILE> \
     --label "Compute and Transfer Flow Example 1 Run"
   ```
   And save the run ID for use in the next command.

3. Monitor the run progress:
   ```bash
   globus flows run show <RUN_ID>
   ```

## Compute and Transfer Flow: Example 2

> In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user-provided list source files that exists on a user provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the second example, the Compute and Transfer flow takes in a user-provided list of source files that exist on a user provided source collection, creates a tarfile from it, and transfers the tarfile to a user provided destination collection. Specifically, the flow will:
```
